oh look at that thing like so mysterious
and oddly lifelike that I in the middle
like it's like staring at you like mmm
it's kind of creepy but it proper drools
you man that thing is weird I love it
so this weirds creepy yeah absolutely
stunning object is called the engraved
hourglass nebula and it's what we call a
planetary nebula in our own Milky Way
just over 8,000 light-years from Earth
and a planetary nebula despite the name
has absolutely nothing to do with
planets it's a bit of a misnomer from
astronomical history you know and they
were first observed back in sort of like
the eighteen hundred's they were mostly
round and they had kind of rings so
people thought they looked like a planet
in a way and so they got dubbed
planetary nebulae apparently we have a
William Herschel to blame for that and
what they are instead is the outer
layers of a star that's been thrown off
at the end of its lifetime so a star
that's not really big enough to go
supernova something like the Sun and
maybe lower masses as well where they
expand what we call a red giant phase
and then once they've gone through that
phase they shed those outer layers that
have expanded into this giant ring and
you get left with this sort of remnant
core of the star in the center which is
actually still emitting UV radiation and
it's that UV radiation that then hits
that surrounding material that's been
thrown off and it is that material and
what I mean there is that it causes
electrons in the atoms of that gas to
jump up to another energy level and then
they don't like being there that's not
where they're supposed to be so they
jump back down to where they're supposed
to be and then they give out light and
that's always the exact same wavelength
of light so the different colors come
from the different elements so you get a
lot of red light from hydrogen the first
transition from some of the second level
down to the first you can also get very
blue light from hydrogen which is the
third level down to the second as well
it's something we call H beta rather
than H alpha and then also you can get
greenish blue light from oxygen
transitions as well and it's actually a
really short phase
in a star's lifetime so a star like the
Sun that will make one of these
planetary nebulae will probably live for
about 10 million years or so the Sun
having lived for about four and a half
to five billion years of that already
but this planetary nebulae phase will
only last something like 10,000 years
such a Creek and then that what it does
mean is that all the elements made
inside of the star are actually thrown
out into the surrounding space so
usually what's happening inside of a
star is nuclear fusion this is the
process that causes them to give off so
much energy and light which is great for
us here down on earth and what happens
is you take four atoms of hydrogen and
you turn them into an atomic helium but
that can only happen in the very center
of the star where it's hot enough and
dense enough for those reactions to be
forced to happen but eventually you'll
reach a point where you filled the
region of the star where it's hot enough
and dense enough for that kind of
nuclear fusion reaction to occur with
all of the helium and at that point the
star starts to make all the heavier
elements through further processes of
fusion so into carbon nitrogen oxygen
and all the way up to iron in the
biggest stars so this process of
throwing out all this material in a
planetary nebula means that the next
generation of stars that form will have
carbon oxygen nitrogen there in order to
make planets and in the Earth's case
provide the elements needed for life
this is why everyone was always like oh
my later star dust because well we are
anyway this algis tabular was actually
originally discovered by Annie jump
cannon and Margaret Mail when they were
working at the Harvard College
Observatory at a sort of end of the
1800s beginning of the 1900s they're
working as what were called computers at
the time so computers - you and me are
machines that do all of the jobs and
calculations that we don't really want
to do well back then women were the
machines that did all of the work in
calculations that nobody else wanted to
do so professional astronomers would
hire women to go through their data as
computers just like that film hidden
Biggers about the black women that
worked in NASA during the space race
that basically did all
the mathematics for us to get people
into space back to it and to the moon as
well they were considered computers too
if you haven't seen that film like what
do you do with your life like just stop
watching this video and just go watch
that film instead because it's amazing
we've been through this it is not
possible there is no protocol for women
attending there's no protocol for man
circling the Earth either sir but when
it was first discovered Annie jump
cannon and Margaret male just kind of
classified it as like a fuzzy roundish
looking nebula they didn't have good
enough telescopes to actually reveal
that hourglass structure and so it
wasn't actually until very recently that
that was actually discovered it wasn't
until the 90s that we actually had an
image that revealed this beautiful
hourglass shape and also how red the
surrounding material was and I remember
I said that red light comes from
hydrogen so that makes sense there's a
lot of hydrogen in stars but what is
making this weird hourglass shape rather
than just something that's perfectly
come off the star in a ring like we see
with normal planetary nebulae so it's
probably still ongoing we don't actually
know how to describe what our dubbed
these extreme bipolar nebula so there
was a study that came out last year in
2018 by Clyde and collaborators that
tried to come up with an explanation for
the hourglass nebula first of all you
can see that the remnant star that's
supposed to be in the very center of the
nebula responsible for this expulsion of
material outwards is not in the center
it actually offset slightly also there's
two hourglass structures there is the
main one that you can really see but
then when you actually go and look at
higher resolution in the very center
there's a secondary one which is
actually then offset the first one by a
very small angle by about five degrees
the tilt and so any formation theory
that you come up with for this
out--that's nebula it has to both
consider first of all how you get the
allagash shape second how you get this
secondary hourglass in the center and
third why the star also isn't in the
center itself so one of the theories
that comes up all the time to try and
explain the shape of these bipolar
nebulae is the fact that it's not just a
single star it's two stars ie a binary
our system that's created it a system
where you've got two stars orbiting
around a common center of mass which
might sound weird but actually nearly
50% of all stars in our sky are actually
binary stars you can actually see one
tonight if you're in the northern
hemisphere anyway this is the one I know
one of the stars in the Big Dipper or
the plows I like that the handle of the
plow is a binary star and if you get
binoculars you'll realize there's
actually two stars there not just one
star and essentially people are drawn to
the idea of binary stars to describe
anything that is not symmetrical so in
this case the algaas nebula is very
asymmetric so perhaps it's been caused
by two stars orbiting around each other
so what you want to do is search for a
companion star on your image and again a
binary star might explain why the star
in the middle isn't in the exact center
and that it's offset but unfortunately
this paper by Collider Talon in 2018
didn't find any companion stars in that
Center there is one just outside the
center but it's so far away from the
other star ik unlikely that are actually
in a binary system together and also
from the shape of the nebula in the
position of the star it's unclear as to
how that star in that position would
have actually produced that shape so
it's more likely than that star is
actually what we call a field star so a
star that's not actually near the thing
we're actually observing but actually is
maybe in the foreground or in the
background and it's just part of the
general distribution of stars that we
see in the sky it could just be that
this companion star is in the middle
somewhere and it's just incredibly faint
so we can't see it if it is faint what
you want to do is use the infrared to
search for it because even if it was
very faint in the optical it would still
glow because it's a hot star and you'd
be able to see it the thing is there was
a lot of infrared light in that central
region which is bouncing around off all
the gas and dust in there that was
thrown off the star in that X portion
that created the planetary nebula and so
you've just kind of got this like
low-level or diffuse infrared light in
that whole region which could underneath
it could be hiding a very faint
companion star we just don't know
but since they haven't managed to find a
companion star in
the collaborators on this paper were
like well what else could it be
instead what else is this shape
reminiscent of it's actually quite
reminiscent of the weird bubbles that we
see out of the Milky Way caused by the
accretion disk around its central
supermassive black hole so they also
said well what if this star also has one
of these accretion disks what if there
was some material around the star that
settled down into a disc that's now sort
of swirling and spiraling onto its
surface in that case you could create
this shape but then why would your star
then be offset but the thing is though
we have some idea of the energetics
involved in this expulsion of this
material because of how far the
materials gone and how fast it's moving
when we measure it but they worked out
that if the star was just decreasing
generally material from around it in its
general vicinity there was never going
to be enough stuff there in order to
give you how much energy you needed to
create this hourglass shape so something
else must have happened there also must
have shifted the star from the very
center of the nebula as well so their
idea was that actually there was a
planet around this star that in that red
giant phase and expulsion of material
had been sort of vaporized and then that
material is now what's formed an
accretion disk and is spiraling around
it it would have to be something that we
call a hot Jupiter so a planet that is
jupiter-sized but instead of orbiting
really far away from its star like our
Jupiter in the solar system does and
actually orbits very very close to its
star and so it's a very very hot planet
so if it was orbiting that close then
yeah it would have been affected by this
red giant phase and then this X portion
of material so that clearly would have
affected the planet orbit and it would
have started falling in towards its star
and the energy in that process actually
could have kicked the star out of the
original center of the planetary nebula
cause this accretion disk where material
was spiraling in and then giving off
energy as it was expelled back outwards
again in the nebula and caused this
weird hourglass shape now we find a lot
of these hot Jupiters when we search for
exoplanets and that might be because
we're biased defining them because they
are so big they're easier to spot and
have very short orbits and so they
repeat very often so we can be sure that
that's what we've seen but still we know
that there is a very large number of
them around stars in the Milky Way and
it has been long thought that you should
find them orbiting around white dwarfs
this remnant that you get after the end
of this red giant phase of these kind of
stars so they never really been found
and so the hypothesis was the more
probably they were destroyed in the red
giant phase when the star swells up but
this paper from Clyde and collaborators
last year suggests that they could be a
very strong contender for the object
responsible for these weird creepy
beautiful extreme bipolar nebula like
the engraved hourglass nebula why yes I
do absolutely love this t-shirt thank
you for asking you got to read it like
you're a toast where is me engraved a
Lagasse nebula in the sky in claim I
don't have one Weibull and it's actually
a very short-lived stage of a star's
life it's only gonna be around for
something like 10,000 years or so 10,000
years we'll give yourself a crick in the
neck sorry this is about video I'll stop
doing that get on with it
why man great till they gotta be great